README.rst, before:

Literature Context (lit_contextizer) Package README
===================================================
A package for extracting protein-protein relations and biological contexts (e.g. cell type,
tissues) from full scientific biomedical text then detecting instances where the context is qualifying the relationship.

Installation
------------
First navigate to the directory where you would like this package to live and clone this repo. Then install this as a local package with pip.

.. code-block::

    $ cd {HOME}
    $ git clone https://github.com/dnsosa/lit_contextizer.git
    $ cd lit_contextizer
    $ pip install -e .


Usage
-----
In this section, we will walk you through all the steps for data pre-processing and analysis.


Data Processing
_______________

Option 1: Loading pre-processed data from SimTK
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you'd like to go straight to analysis/experiments, you can download the pre-processed datasets from the affiliated `lit_con SimTK project page <https://simtk.org/projects/lit_con>`_ .

.. code-block::

    $ # Make sure you're in the lit_contextizer dir you cloned
    $ mkdir output
    $
    $ # Download preprocessed data from SimTK
    $ wget https://simtk.org/docman/view.php/2474/14118/simtk_context_ppi_output_files.zip -P output
    $ unzip output/simtk_context_ppi_output_files.zip
    $ mv output/simtk_context_ppi_output_files/* output/

Option 2: Pre-process data from scratch
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you'd like to process the data from scratch all the way through extracting features, we will describe the data processing pipeline as a series of steps (processes) taking inputs and yielding outputs.


**Step 1: Extracting all relationships from PubMed full text articles using dependency parsing**

Input: TO DO

Process:

.. code-block::

    $ TO DO

Output: TO DO

In subsequent steps, processes are executed via the command-line interface (CLI) provided in the ``lit_contextizer`` package.

**Step 2: Identifying contexts mentioned in papers containing one of the extracted relations**

Input: Directory ``input/annotated_text_dir/files`` containing the annotated full texts

Process:

.. code-block::

    $ python -m lit_contextizer --output_folder output --full_text_dir input/annotated_text_dir/files --parse_files --dump_annots_context

Output: ``output/pmid2contexts.csv``, ``output/contexts2pmid.csv``


**Step 3: Create the Insider corpora and extract features from Insider documents**
Repeat this process for each of ``{CTs, tissues, combined}``.

Input: ``output/pmid2contexts.csv``, ``output/contexts2pmid.csv``, ``output/all_pubmed_relations_df``, ``input/annotated_text_dir/files``

Process:

.. code-block::

    $ python -m lit_contextizer --no_parse_files --insider_context_type {CTs, tissues, combined} --output_folder output --full_text_dir input/annotated_text_dir/files

Output: ``output/{CTs, tissues, combined}_insider_papers_features_df.tsv``


**Step 4: Download GIANT PPIs**

Input: None

Process:

.. code-block::

    $ wget -P input/GIANT_PPIs "https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/humanbase/networks/adipose_tissue_top.gz"
    $ wget -P input/GIANT_PPIs "https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/humanbase/networks/liver_top.gz"
    $ wget -P input/GIANT_PPIs "https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/humanbase/networks/lung_top.gz"
    $ cd input/GIANT_PPIs
    $ gunzip *

Output: ``input/GIANT_PPIs``


**Step 5: Extract features from papers containing one of our extracted relations that describes a PPI found in one of the retrieved GIANT networks.**

Input: ``input/GIANT_PPIs``

Process:

.. code-block::

    $ python -m lit_contextizer --no_parse_files --networks_folder input/GIANT_PPIs --paper_subset giant --output_folder output

Output: ``adipose_tissue_ppi_pmc_df_conf0.0.csv``, ``liver_ppi_pmc_df_conf0.0.csv``, ``lung_ppi_pmc_df_conf0.0.csv``, ``ppi_pmc_tissues_features_df_conf0.0.csv``


**Step 6: Extract features from papers containing one of our extracted relations that describes one of our input PPI pairs.**

Input: ``dengue_ppi_paras.csv``

.. code-block::

    $ python -m lit_contextizer --no_parse_files --networks_folder input/GIANT_PPIs --paper_subset giant --output_folder output

Output: ``dengue_papers_features_df.tsv``



Analysis
________

Step-by-step runthrough of analyses can be found in the provdied notebook, ``notebooks/Literature Contextizer Analyses Notebook.ipynb``


Testing
-------

To test this code, use ``tox``:

.. code-block::

    $ pip install tox
    $ tox

We have configured ``tox`` to check a) test coverage, b) ``pyroma`` compliance for package metadata, c) ``flake8`` compliance for PEP-8 code style, d) ``doc8`` compliance for ``.rst`` files, e) README style guidelines, and f) ``sphinx`` documentation builds.


Documentation
_____________

Running ``tox`` above should automatically build the ``readTheDocs``-style ``sphinx`` documentation, however this can
also be accomplished by running the following:

.. code-block::

    $ cd docs
    $ make html
    $ open build/html/index.html

Commit message:

Update with details of running NLP pipeline

README.rst, after:

Literature Context (lit_contextizer) Package README
===================================================
A package for extracting protein-protein relations and biological contexts (e.g. cell type,
tissues) from full scientific biomedical text then detecting instances where the context is qualifying the relationship.

Installation
------------
First navigate to the directory where you would like this package to live and clone this repo. Then install this as a local package with pip.

.. code-block::

    $ cd {HOME}
    $ git clone https://github.com/dnsosa/lit_contextizer.git
    $ cd lit_contextizer
    $ pip install -e .


Usage
-----
In this section, we will walk you through all the steps for data pre-processing and analysis.


Data Processing
_______________

Option 1: Loading pre-processed data from SimTK
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you'd like to go straight to analysis/experiments, you can download the pre-processed datasets from the affiliated `lit_con SimTK project page <https://simtk.org/projects/lit_con>`_ .

.. code-block::

    $ # Make sure you're in the lit_contextizer dir you cloned
    $ mkdir output
    $
    $ # Download preprocessed data from SimTK
    $ wget https://simtk.org/docman/view.php/2474/14118/simtk_context_ppi_output_files.zip -P output
    $ unzip output/simtk_context_ppi_output_files.zip
    $ mv output/simtk_context_ppi_output_files/* output/

Option 2: Pre-process data from scratch
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you'd like to process the data from scratch all the way through extracting features, we will describe the data processing pipeline as a series of steps (processes) taking inputs and yielding outputs.


**Step 1: Extracting all relationships from PubMed full text articles using dependency parsing**

To build the relation data from scratch, you will need to use the Biotext project to download PubMed/PMC, convert to BioC files and match entity mentions against data from PubTator. Follow the instructions on the BioText page to create the PubTator aligned files. You should then complete the BIOTEXT and CORES variable in the shell commands below.

Input: PubMed and PMC files converted to BioC XML files and aligned with PubTator entity extractions

Process:

.. code-block::

    $ export BIOTEXT=/path/to/pubtator/bioc/files
    $ export CORES=1
    $ cd metadata && sh gather_metadata.sh
    $ cd relation_extraction
    $ MODE=full BIOTEXT=$BIOTEXT snakemake --cores $CORES

Output: ``relation_extraction/working/with_tidy_citation_distances/*.bioc.xml`` (BioC XML files with PPI relations extracted and context words extracted.)

In subsequent steps, processes are executed via the command-line interface (CLI) provided in the ``lit_contextizer`` package.

**Step 2: Identifying contexts mentioned in papers containing one of the extracted relations**

Input: Directory ``input/annotated_text_dir/files`` containing the annotated full texts

Process:

.. code-block::

    $ python -m lit_contextizer --output_folder output --full_text_dir input/annotated_text_dir/files --parse_files --dump_annots_context

Output: ``output/pmid2contexts.csv``, ``output/contexts2pmid.csv``


**Step 3: Create the Insider corpora and extract features from Insider documents**
Repeat this process for each of ``{CTs, tissues, combined}``.

Input: ``output/pmid2contexts.csv``, ``output/contexts2pmid.csv``, ``output/all_pubmed_relations_df``, ``input/annotated_text_dir/files``

Process:

.. code-block::

    $ python -m lit_contextizer --no_parse_files --insider_context_type {CTs, tissues, combined} --output_folder output --full_text_dir input/annotated_text_dir/files

Output: ``output/{CTs, tissues, combined}_insider_papers_features_df.tsv``


**Step 4: Download GIANT PPIs**

Input: None

Process:

.. code-block::

    $ wget -P input/GIANT_PPIs "https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/humanbase/networks/adipose_tissue_top.gz"
    $ wget -P input/GIANT_PPIs "https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/humanbase/networks/liver_top.gz"
    $ wget -P input/GIANT_PPIs "https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/humanbase/networks/lung_top.gz"
    $ cd input/GIANT_PPIs
    $ gunzip *

Output: ``input/GIANT_PPIs``


**Step 5: Extract features from papers containing one of our extracted relations that describes a PPI found in one of the retrieved GIANT networks.**

Input: ``input/GIANT_PPIs``

Process:

.. code-block::

    $ python -m lit_contextizer --no_parse_files --networks_folder input/GIANT_PPIs --paper_subset giant --output_folder output

Output: ``adipose_tissue_ppi_pmc_df_conf0.0.csv``, ``liver_ppi_pmc_df_conf0.0.csv``, ``lung_ppi_pmc_df_conf0.0.csv``, ``ppi_pmc_tissues_features_df_conf0.0.csv``


**Step 6: Extract features from papers containing one of our extracted relations that describes one of our input PPI pairs.**

Input: ``dengue_ppi_paras.csv``

.. code-block::

    $ python -m lit_contextizer --no_parse_files --networks_folder input/GIANT_PPIs --paper_subset giant --output_folder output

Output: ``dengue_papers_features_df.tsv``



Analysis
________

Step-by-step runthrough of analyses can be found in the provdied notebook, ``notebooks/Literature Contextizer Analyses Notebook.ipynb``


Testing
-------

To test this code, use ``tox``:

.. code-block::

    $ pip install tox
    $ tox

We have configured ``tox`` to check a) test coverage, b) ``pyroma`` compliance for package metadata, c) ``flake8`` compliance for PEP-8 code style, d) ``doc8`` compliance for ``.rst`` files, e) README style guidelines, and f) ``sphinx`` documentation builds.


Documentation
_____________

Running ``tox`` above should automatically build the ``readTheDocs``-style ``sphinx`` documentation, however this can
also be accomplished by running the following:

.. code-block::

    $ cd docs
    $ make html
    $ open build/html/index.html
